# Benjamin Schartow, Building Twentyone

[Building Twentyone](http://www.buildingtwentyone.org/) helps teenagers develop positive habits and values by giving them a safe, constructive place to drop in after school. They offer the only indoor skate park within 75 miles of Lansing, Michigan, a large, open space for safe party alternatives, tutoring and mentoring, and workspaces for meetings.

The charity has two buildings: the indoor skate park and a separate building next door with space that can be rented for large events.

## Contact

```
Benjamin Schartow
Executive Director
Building Twentyone
1288 N Cedar
Mason, MI 48854
benjamin@buildinttwentyone.org
```

## Transcript

`ERIK:` I already know the name of the nonprofit, so what is the cause or mission of Building Twentyone and the importance of it?

`BENJAMIN:` My idea of having a teen center goes back to when I was a teenager so I really always felt like it was a calling or passion of mine. From even walking in the streets when I was helping other ministries in Lansing, realizing that there was nowhere for teens. Lots of great programs for kids. That's always been in the back of my mind so a lot of the decisions I've made to go to Bible school, doing an internship at Mt. Hope Church, which is a big large mega-church in Lansing. I started some after school programs with them. And then helping start Journey Life Church kind of all set me on the path to the idea that I wanted to have a teen center some day. And the passion and heartbeat of the leadership at Journey Life Church when we started the church was to have a teen center. This isn't a faith-based organization, but it certainly has certain values and our missions, which of course is online if you click the About, but my whole goal is to help build values and virtues in students to help find their passion and purpose. What I realize working in youth ministry for a number of years, you only get a certain amount of time with teenagers and just preaching to them, talking to them about Jesus on a Wednesday night for a couple hours is not good enough. I think there are a lot of practical things that we miss and so that's what this is. It's more the practical, workshop-oriented type things, bring them in to have a safe place. So that was always my idea and my concept was that I wanted to help teenagers on a practical, on a more natural, organic level than just inviting them into a church.

`ERIK:` I feel like it's more engaging that way for them.

`BENJAMIN:` Yeah, it's a lot more engaging. You build relationships with teenagers, and the only way to really speak and mentor teenagers is to build relationships with them. One of my mentors told me a long time ago, the one who spends the most time wins. Whether that's social media, or music, or their other friends. Whoever's getting to spend the most time with teenagers is going to win. We're just trying to spend more time with them like that. Now, the heartbeat of why I started it. It started after some tragedies that happened in Holt, in this community about five years ago. I had an idea and was working with a business advisor for a year beforehand, just wondered what would it look like to have a teen center. He was asking me all the tough questions that it would take on the 501(c)3 application and a lot of that kind of stuff. Then when the tragedies actually happened, it was after Winterfest Dance in Holt, that a group of teenagers went out to a couple of parties, a couple at MSU, and there was one car in particular where there were three seniors in the back seat and two in the front. They were all seniors at Holt. The driver, though, had a couple of drinks. He hit a tree and all three in the backseat lost their life. It rocked this community pretty hard. The three seniors were pretty popular. They were well-known in the school. The school was rocked pretty hard. The community started having some town hall meetings about what we can do to change perceptions and change teenagers and all of that kind of stuff. Really, nothing came out of those town hall meetings other than, my thought was this is the time we have to start it. If there was any time, any better time, or there is no better time than right now because this community needs it and they're looking for something. My question that I asked at the town hall meeting is "Who is offering an alternative for these teenagers? Who is listening to them and giving them a voice? Nobody is talking to them. Nobody is asking them what they want. We're talking about educating more and having more policies or procedures or more things for parents, but no one's talking to the teenagers." I was pretty upset about that so I started meeting with some teenagers in the last hour of school for the last two months of school during that year and talking with them. There were a bunch of the seniors that were really close to the ones who lost their life. I was like "Hey, what can we do as a community? What do you guys want to see?" Out of that we started these 5th Quarter parties that next fall. The 5th Quarter parties were after football games and after basketball games that were just alternative parties with free pizza, a DJ, inflatables, lots of cool stuff. Giveaways. They were pretty popular for a couple of years. The idea was that we were going to provide an alternative. No one else is providing anything else, they're saying "Don't do these things." Well, if you don't provide an alternative, people will just revert back to old habits and that's what teenagers do. If there's not another option, what are they going to do? They're going to go back to old habits. So we're just trying to provide the other option, the alternative. And then out of that came the Drop-in Center. Students could come after school. The Michigan State Police says that between 3 and 6 in the afternoon is the highest rate of crime for juveniles. So between 13 and 17, it's the highest rate of crime between 3 and 6. Also, 7 and 9 on weekends. And why is that? It's because they're home alone, because parents are gone, they're hitting the streets, they're doing whatever it is they're doing. So the Drop-in Center came out of that as a place to help tutor, help students with homework, create a safe environment, and all of that. And now we're also creating programs for them to get involved in for them to discover their passion and their purpose. That's the few minute version of why it started and how it started.

`ERIK:` Okay, do you mind diving into what sorts of things you're offering as those alternatives now?

`BENJAMIN:` We still do some 5th Quarter parties after football games. We do some safe parties. We have one coming up, a year-end party, and we have a Snow Ball: a dance/dinner party coming up this Saturday that we offer to students. What we do is we partner with the youth groups and some of the things they're doing and some of the things we're doing, we've been asked by the Holt Junior High the last two years to come in a couple of times a year and do school assemblies. We've done some school assemblies for the junior high. Of course, this is kind of that alternative too because we offer Monday through Thursday now, I pick up in a bus every day, Monday through Thursday at Holt High School and Holt Junior High and bring them over here and drop them off. So we're open after school until 6 o'clock right now. Some of the things we've offered, we've done some photography programs, we've done DJ workshops, and improv workshops.

`ERIK:` It sounds like you're constantly bringing in new things?

`BENJAMIN:` Yeah, and this next semester we're really looking at launching some other things like digital media, speech writing, a public speaking workshop. Different things to really help incite passion and purpose.

`ERIK:` I saw you have a bunch of board games around, too. I'm a particular fan of board games. I think that would've been my go to if I were coming here when I was in high school.

`BENJAMIN:` Yeah, a lot of them like to play Apples to Apples and chess. I have no idea why all of those gourds are over there. One of my drop-in volunteers must have a plan. They must be doing something.

`ERIK:` And obviously the skate park?

`BENJAMIN:` Yeah, and then the whole skate park that wasn't ever a part of my idea or part of my philosophy but it presented itself, the building presented itself. This campus is really a unique campus. We also have a lake out back. We have boats for fishing and boating, students love to go out there and hang out by the lake. It's a nice, peaceful, quiet area here. Unfortunately, it's a little farther outside of town than I would have ever loved, but you also can't get this environment in town. Once students get here, it's a safe place. I know who's coming and going. If I see someone pull in or walk around that's not supposed to be, I know they're not supposed to be here and they're on our own campus as opposed to in town where people are coming and going and never knowing who's with you or who's not.

`ERIK:` You work with the junior high in Holt, what about Mason, in the opposite direction? Have you seen being between Holt and Mason...

`BENJAMIN:` We're starting to work our way out that way. The word has spread a little bit into Mason and we've actually gotten a few students from Mason who have come by. But next year we already have a meeting planned with the Honor Society students down there at Mason. We've already met with the assistant principal and I've had the super intendant of Mason take a look at the place. We're working our way there. When you're doing things with students and like this, it's got to be organic. You can't just manufacture students' love to want to come to a place like this. It kind of has to happen. We're trying to make this happen by meeting with some of the students and some of the staff over there and then start that campaign of encouraging them to come here. You know, it's farther away from them. It's actually about the same distance between Holt High School which is on the opposite end of Holt as it is of Mason High School. It's actually quicker to get to Mason High School, but I don't have a bus that's going there yet. The bus that I drive I can only hit Holt right now. We're making our way into Mason a little bit. I have a couple of board members that are very involved in Mason Chamber, rotary in Mason, all that kind of stuff. They're encouraging me to keep going.

`ERIK:` It seems like ultimately it's going to be the students' decisions to come here, but do you see a big influence coming from the parents trying to have their kids try out Building Twentyone.

`BENJAMIN:` Yeah, there's definitely some influence. You have to appeal to both parents and students here. When it comes to marketing, it's tough to market because you have to figure out how to market to both the student and the parent. A lot of students end up coming here because they're failing every subject. We just had a student come by with their parent, who, the parent has been looking for a place for their daughter, who is failing every subject and is a freshman right now. He came across this place, it was recommended, so they stopped by. That's how parents usually end up, it's usually a last resort, though. We find from parents saying "I don't know what else to do." Here's a student that's failing or here's a student that just needs a place because they're getting in trouble all the time. I would rather not be the last resort all the time from parents.

`ERIK:` Hopefully if parents can see the bigger picture of how you're helping... as a recently new parent, if I came by here and saw everything that you're offering, it's eye-opening. It's like, wow, I didn't know that there were so many different opportunities for my kid. She's still got years before she'd have the opportunity to come to a place like this. She's just coming up on 3, but still, depending on how they hear about it and what they're first impression is like as parents, it can affect a lot of the timing of when they try to get their kids in.

`BENJAMIN:` I'd like to get more information out to parents to try to get them more actively engaged in what we're doing. That influences a lot, especially since out here I don't have public transportation. Now, CATA Ready-Ride comes out here and they'll pick up students and drop them off all the time, but a parent has to be proactive in order to get them. I pick them up from the schools, but then they have to be picked up from here. They've got to get home somehow. It takes more proactive parents.

`ERIK:` One of the things I'm exploring a lot is how to get that discovery, how to get more people. Not just target the kids, or the parents of the kids, but more people learning about and being able to talk about charities. It's an interesting problem. It's a challenging one too, isn't it? I'm pretty sure I read that you're a 501(c)3 and I know the location. These are all the basics. How big is the staff?

`BENJAMIN:` We have me, I'm a part-time executive director. I have a Americorp Vista employee. I don't know if you've heard of that before, it's a government program. Essentially it started way back after World War II, I think, to help with poverty and to help get people back to work. Now, Americorp Vista is focused on helping to build capacity with volunteers and funding for nonprofits. We have an Americorp Vista employee from the Ingham County branch called Power of We Consortium, or something like that. It's the Power of We. She's a full time employee technically paid through government money filtering down, but I'm a part-time director, we have an Americorp Vista employee, we have an intern from MSU. I've gotten an MSU social work intern the last couple of years, and then everyone else is all volunteer. My entire skate park staff, I have five skate park managers that all volunteer their time. I have two other people I consider staff members, but they don't get paid anything. They're here almost every day, they're here every other day to help open the place and hang out with students during the drop-in times. Pretty much, everybody's volunteer. We have a number of like, 25 to 30 volunteers that just volunteer their time.

`ERIK:` How often do you have to look for new volunteers?

`BENJAMIN:` Pretty often. That's what our Americorp Vista employee is doing. Part of her job description, the whole goal, is to help build our volunteer base. We met with somebody who wants to do an instruction class on public speaking on Tuesday. We met with another volunteer on Monday. We're constantly recruiting.

`ERIK:` What sort of responsibilities, or background, or requirements do you look for?

`BENJAMIN:` We do a background check with the State of Michigan. And then the rest is what is your heart and what is your passion? Are you going to be consistent in some form or fashion? Consistent doesn't mean you have to come in every day, but when you say you're going to be here, you're here. When I drop off students I need to know that my staff has opened up and it's unlocked, lights are on. I need to know that people are going to be consistent because we rely on our volunteers to be here because you may say that you're good at math and you're here every Tuesday and we will tell people that every Tuesday we have someone good at tutoring math. So if you don't show up, now we look like jerks because there are people showing up to get help with math and my volunteers aren't here. I look for consistency, I look for your heart and passion. Do you have a heart to reach out to the next generation. You don't need to have a ton of things, you don't need to have a tone of skills. We'll take whatever skills you have and utilize them to the best of your ability. If you don't want to work with teenagers much then that's great, I have a crew that comes in on Mondays and helps clean. They sweep and mop and whatever. They don't work with teenagers, but they want to be a part. For me, I just look for the consistency and your heart.

`ERIK:` How do decisions get made to move the nonprofit along?

`BENJAMIN:` Most day to day operations, of course, it's up to the executive director, which is me. Of course, we have our board of directors, which makes the larger decisions of renting this place, the larger financial decisions like redoing our lights, which we will be doing as soon as that program opens back up with Consumers Energy. They make the larger decisions of "Hey, should we explore this Americorp Vista employee or not?" because there is a financial obligation that we have to that. Day to day, it's me with my team. I'm a team-oriented type of guy anyway. I don't like to make every decision with an iron fist kind of deal, I'm a collaborative kind of guy. I would rather ask my team "What do you guys think about this? Or what do you think about that?" and move forward. The skate park was redone mainly because I had a skate park manager who was here the last two years. That was his heart and passion. He helped build the park. That's the only reason the park was rebuilt. I had a couple of guys who were passionate about it and I wasn't moving forward unless they think he could pull this off. He poured his heart and soul into it. It wasn't like it was me saying "Let's rebuild the skate park and raise 17 grand." That's a lot of undertaking, but because we had a team working at it, it works.

`ERIK:` That's great. What is the number one way that anyone who finds out about Building Twentyone can help?

`BENJAMIN:` The number one way that they can help?

`ERIK:` Yeah, would it be through donating money, supplies, volunteering...

`BENJAMIN:` I think donations of money or time are the number one way that people can help. If you can't donate time then you should donate money. If you can't donate money, then give up your time. That's the way I feel. In that, there are supplies. We always provide a healthy snack for students when they come in. Trail mix bars, Cheez Its, or something a little healthier. We always provide a snack. So whether it's in the form of a snack or supplies. This stuff: pens, paper, pencils. All that stuff costs money.

`ERIK:` I'll go ahead and jump ahead. What kinds of things does the money get spent on? You mentioned the snacks, maintenance on the skate park ramps...

`BENJAMIN:` Yeah, maintenance on that, keeping the computers up to date. A lot of our money goes to rent and heat. Although the heat is turned down right now because no one is in the building so it's a little cold. A lot of our overhead is basic. I'm only a part-time director, you're not paying salaries, you're just paying for a space to be in. We got declined from being an affiliate with United Way because our administration costs are over 33%, which what they roll into administration costs are rent and utilities. Well, mainly the cost that we have is providing a building and a space for teenagers to be after school, which takes rent and utilities. That's most of my expense. It's that kind of stuff. And then programming costs. When we do have programs like digital media or we're looking at bringing in iTech to do some programs. There are costs associated with that. There is a cost associated with having Americorp Vista employee, although all of that is actually grant funded. So we find grants to fund a lot of the programs. When we talk about paying for snacks, paying for gas for the bus, a lot of that stuff is actually funded through grants that we've found. The hardest thing to fund is overhead because getting unrestricted money from fundraisers and donations. Who wants to say "I'd love you to donate $1,000 and by the way, all of that is going to utilities?" Well, it's got to get paid. You don't want to tell people that in a fundraiser. "Oh by the way, all of this money is going to rent and utilities." That's not a sexy thing to say, but that's what it costs to have something like this. We get a lot of funds from grants that help cover some of the programs, but we need unrestricted funds like money from donations, from our fundraisers, or whatever, that can actually pay for rent and utilities and more staff. I can't continue to have 100% volunteers all the time, eventually my staff has to grow. I'd like to start paying some of the people who have been with me for three years, volunteering their time, you know? If that makes sense, I get upset when you want to add in that our program involves having a roof and heat.

`ERIK:` Yeah, it's an interesting problem to try to address because a lot of people fixate on that number. Like, "What are you operational expenses?" and they're more concerned about that number than thinking about what the number actually means. In your case, obviously the biggest thing is that you need a building to have a drop-in center. And without a lot of partitioned rooms I can imagine it costs a lot to heat this place.

`BENJAMIN:` Heat and lights, that's why we're redoing the lights. We just got a grant that's going to redo the lights and cut our utilities by 70%.

`ERIK:` Wow!

`BENJAMIN:` These lights are massively expensive. When I paid last month over $500, and we didn't even have the heat on because last month was warm, unseasonably warm, about $12 of that was heat, the rest was lights. So last year when it was bitterly cold, I had heat and light bills of just about $1,000. $8-900, a lot of them. That's a big cost for us. We provide a space for students to be that no one else has. And a consistent space, not like you can come once a week from 2-6 or 4-6, that's your teen's time.

`ERIK:` Right, you're always ready to go. Some of these questions have been covered naturally. What are some of your recent big accomplishments?

`BENJAMIN:` We just had our fundraiser, which was the largest fundraiser we've done. We raised over $8,800, which was good for us. We had Modern Woodmen of America donate $2,500. They matched any funds up to $2,500. We just did Tailgate for Teens, it was a fun fundraiser for anyone to come to. It was tailgate themed/styled in October and it raised $8,700 and that was after costs. That was what we profited. That was the best fundraiser we've ever done, the best one-time fundraiser. That was a pretty big accomplishment. That really helps us throughout the year, for sure. We need that number to triple, but still, for our best fundraiser that was cool. I think a couple of the other accomplishments, the fact that we've been asked by the Holt Junior High to come in and do assemblies, motivational assemblies. We just did that in November. They asked us to do it the last two years right before the Thanksgiving break, that Tuesday before they get out of school. They do a special lunch, a turkey, potatoes, pumpkin pie-type of lunch. In the cafeteria they decorate the entire cafeteria with a Thanksgiving theme and make it nice with table linens and all that kind of stuff. Then we have people, other staff, that's walking around, talking with them, encouraging them, so while they're in lunch, some are in the assembly, and then they switch. In the assembly I showed a really powerful, encouraging video about Ben Comen. You should look that video up, it was done by ESPN, one of their 30-for-30 or some type of documentary thing on Ben Comen, this kid with cerebral palsy that actually ran track. Very, very motivational. Then I brought in a rapper who came in and rapped and shared some of his story. That's a pretty big accomplishment, I think, to be able to get into a school and provide some motivation right before Thanksgiving. And personal story accomplishments. Some of the biggest accomplishments are where you have a student who starts coming in at the end of last year. She was kind of reserved, pretty Goth-looking. I bring that up just because that is the outward expression of what is going on inside. When they're reserved and wearing a lot of the dark clothes and dark eyeshadow, that tells you something. It's not just "Oh this is just my identity," they're doing that a  lot of times because there is something going on inside of them. A lot of times at home, or what they're struggling with. And to see a student like that, she's a beautiful girl, to go from being hidden and shy to this year, she's a lot more outgoing, she's the President of the Teen Advisory Council. I was surprised. To see it turn, not only to see somebody's attitude, but someone who was struggling last year in school who, this year, her goal is to get all straight-A's and she's doing it all, she's accomplishing that. Those personal accomplishments are obviously more special. It's that one person that you can change their story. There's definitely a few of those who, they come here and they live here, and without this place their story would be much different. They wouldn't be as confident as they are, they wouldn't be as well-adjusted to society, they wouldn't be working as well with people as they are.

`ERIK:` They wouldn't have even had the opportunity to grow.

`BENJAMIN:` Yeah, and those are some of the best accomplishments. And that takes time, you know? It certainly takes time and we've only been doing that for a few years. That's the amount of time it takes before you see some of that. If you don't stay in it long enough, you're not going to see those results.

`ERIK:` It's not like you're going to get those a week after you open the doors.

`BENJAMIN:` Yeah, or you do a ten-week program and all the sudden a life is changed. Stuff is still going on at home, parents are still fighting over custody, they still don't have money to put food on the table, all that stuff is still going on. A ten-week program where they learn photography isn't going to change their world, but it might incite a passion or something inside of them, a type of drive that they didn't have before. Or give them a sense of purpose that they didn't have before because they had all this other junk going on in their world.

`ERIK:` That moment where I discovered computers, it was life-changing. I knew that I had to do something with that thing.

`BENJAMIN:` When did you discover that?

`ERIK:` I was twelve, not quite a teenager.

`BENJAMIN:` 7th grade?

`ERIK:` Yeah, exactly. It took some time to make that transition. I had grown up in North Carolina with my mom, my parents were divorced, she lived in North Carolina, my dad lived in Kalamazoo. I grew up with her and we didn't have a computer. The life lived down there was way different than the one I lived up here. One of the big changes was my dad was interested in technology and trying new things so we got a computer when I moved up here. I'm pretty sure he just told me the only rule was if I broke it then I have to fix it. By going through that I learned a lot and it set me on a totally different path than I thought my life was going to take. I would have never guessed and it would have never happened if I didn't have that opportunity. Whatever it takes, photography, public speaking...

`BENJAMIN:` We're trying to do some things with iTech, which is a technology nonprofit that works with schools and other nonprofits to bring in a digital media program, a Lego robotics program. That kind of stuff is so interesting because we're trying to figure out how we market that and then how do we get teens to sign up for programs like that when they may not know that they even have a bend toward that or that they would love it? But if they got into it, man, imagine the what the possibilities are if they, like you, find their niche or their passion, and then that just sparks something. But it's hard to get teenagers to sign up for these types of programs. That's the big thing. They don't know that they may love art, they don't know that they may love digital media, you know? That's our big challenge. How do we get them to sign up?

`ERIK:` I can see that. We've all been through our stubborn phase, sometimes you just don't want to. Not because you have a good reason not to, but because "Why would I want to do that?" What about the future? What sorts of big things are coming up in the future?

`BENJAMIN:` The big things are we're trying to solidify and hone in on what our programming is going to be. Costs, what the sliding scale is going to be. So near future, we're going to be offering this next semester at the end of January some actual programs that students will pay for. Some of the students will be grandfathered in, but we're excited about that. And expanding on that programming and what that looks like for the following year. For the fall of 2016 I have a grant-writer that is excited about helping us and setting us up for 2016 in the fall so we would have the money to do the programs that we would want to do. We're looking at all of that this spring and summer to write all of that so we have money for the following year. And then, for me, I look at expanding in the next year and two years, expanding to the different communities like Mason and Everett. We're almost exactly the same distance between all those high schools. It's crazy to think of because of our location that we're almost the exact same distance to Holt High School, Everett High School, and Mason High School. Within point-something miles of each other.

`ERIK:` That's a pretty solid location.

`BENJAMIN:` It is, the biggest problem is transportation. I'm trying to work with CATA to figure out what we could do differently with that. Just expanding from Holt, which this is our home base, we're very engrained in Holt, we're solidified in Holt. I mean, I can walk into the high school and I've got all of the principal and super intendants' cell phones. They know us and we have a good relationship with them. So taking that and duplicating that in two other communities like Mason and Everett. In the long-term, I would love in five years to have another Building Twentyone location somewhere. There are a couple of spots in Lansing that I look at. On the corner of Holmes and Cedar Street there is an old precinct that has a gym, basketball courts, and a bunch of classroom spaces. It's all just sitting vacant and empty.

`ERIK:` I think I know where you're talking about.

`BENJAMIN:` Next to Papa John's and there's a library right there. It's right there on the corner where Everett is. Having a location like that to say "Great, we can offer some other programs down here" and we can hit a different kind of community and population. But you see, that Building Twentyone would look different than a Building Twentyone here. Programming would maybe be different, your population is certainly going to be different, but I would love to see the day that we could open up Building Twentyones in different communities to offer to teenagers what that community wants or that community needs. Some of the things might be the exact same, some would be a little bit different because of the location. I would love to get a location like that and I see this as, I would love to keep this location, but we're limited on a couple of things here that are pretty crucial. Like not having actual classroom space somewhere split up. The open spaces are really unique here. The spot with the lake and seclusion is really unique here. I want to keep this, I don't want to lose this spot. But I know I want to grow into a couple other places that we could offer programs that maybe we can't do or couldn't offer here. I'm never going to have a gym down here, I'm never going to have a basketball court here. But I could somewhere else. In five years I would love to see that, but what does that take? That takes money and that takes a donation of time from people. That's really what it is. I think we could grow and expand into another spot if we just had more money. I even think we could find the volunteers pretty easily.

`ERIK:` Yeah, I'd imagine as you want to grow to be able to touch more lives, you're also going to be touching the lives of people who would be interested in helping those same new people.

`BENJAMIN:` That's the interesting part that I never saw the dynamic of. As a youth pastor, I've been working with the church world for so long. I was in sales for 10 years at Art Van, too. It's not like I haven't been out working in the real world. Working at Art Van, has been interesting. I could tell you some stories. It's interesting being in charge of an organization like this because I have skate park managers and volunteers that it's different than me being the youth pastor and having a bunch of leaders that we all believe the same. With Building Twentyone, being able to reach out and help volunteers and students, I got into it thinking I was going to just help a bunch of students but really, what I need to be thinking of is that I need to be equipping and empowering my volunteers and my leaders and my managers so that they can equip and empower teenagers. It's a different mind-shift for me to be thinking "Wow, I have a group of guys over here at the skate park manager level that need someone to believe in them." They need someone to touch their life and empower them.

`ERIK:` Challenging! People who don't have a background that has instilled that in them, they might have a terrible job or their own life that they're working against. They just know they want to help.

`BENJAMIN:` That's pretty much it! A lot of people come in here and they know they want to help but they don't know the how or why. I didn't see that three years ago. That wow, I'm actually giving volunteers a sense of purpose. That, I never saw coming. One of them, I call her one of my staff members, but she's a junior high teacher. She's an 8th grade English teacher at Holt and she's on my board. She said publicly when we've gone into different situations that when she was working, just as an example, she was working at Holt Central, which was an alternative ed. building just down the street here and she was there for 10 years and Holt closed that building so she was transferred into Holt Junior High. For a year she was looking for something because her heart was at that alternative education for so many years. So now, being an 8th grade English teacher was different. She was looking for a place that she would have a sense of purpose for. She came across Building Twentyone and she said this has almost saved her life. It gave her a passion for teaching teenagers again. Because once they closed her school down she wasn't sure what she wanted to do any more. And now, she's found a sense of passion and she's here every day after school. She goes to her teaching job and then comes here and hangs out with teenagers for another 2-3 hours. She said this is what she's meant to do. When she first started, I made the mistake, I kept thanking her. I was so glad she was helping me out. And then she correct me. She said "What are you talking about? This is my thing, too! This is my thing. I'm not just helping you out!" You're right, it's not like you're helping me out, this is your thing. You're taking ownership of it. To see people like that, they are owners of it now. It's not just my thing. That's a win that is very interesting to see. That you are empowering your volunteers, too.

`ERIK:` That's great. Let's see, let's check on the time. I don't know what you're schedule is like.

`BENJAMIN:` I have another meeting and I have to be done at 12:30.

`ERIK:` Okay, I think the last set of questions are mostly for helping me understand nonprofits in general. To help me get a little bit of exposure and helping me explore how I can help with Giving Jar. What are the biggest mistakes that you see nonprofits making? Or if you want to think of it in terms of early mistakes made here that you have learned from.

`BENJAMIN:` It's an ongoing mistake, but not getting enough website or social media presence. The biggest mistakes I feel like I make are not making enough time or not devoting enough time or having enough knowledge in order to update my website, get traffic to my website, or create social media campaigns that are effective. I feel like I am constantly making that mistake. I certainly made that mistake way earlier. There would be some things where we would try to do a fundraiser and we just did not get the word out soon enough. We did not spread the word very effectively, we didn't get enough invitations out soon enough. I think a lot of mistakes that we make, that I make, and probably other nonprofits make, is the time schedule that it's going to take when you have a campaign like putting a fundraiser together. When you're running a nonprofit, and I run into this when I meet other people in the nonprofit world, we have the same heart and passion to reach out for some cause, right? We all have a cause, whether it's trying to eliminate poverty or helping eliminate or helping with the hunger and food issues, so they're building gardens. They all have these kind of niches or these things that they want to do. Fundraising and advertising campaigns are not things we were ever trained in, for the most part. I was in sales so if I get in a room with somebody then I can sell you Building Twentyone, but it's getting to that point. It's getting in front of these CEOs. How do we actually have a campaign so they actually come to my fundraiser. How do we advertise so people actually show up to our things that we want them to show up to? That's where I feel like I make the biggest mistakes. I see, from other nonprofits, they're all looking and asking some of the same questions. How do we get people to show up to our fundraiser, to give more, you know, that kind of thing. Those aren't things that most of us are trained in. Even if you were trained in a business sense, you might be trained how to crunch the numbers and make sure the business runs, but advertising, marketing, fundraising is another animal. That's where I certainly made some of the biggest mistakes, where a couple of our fundraisers didn't make money. Well that wasn't really a fundraiser then! It was just an event.

`ERIK:` What are some successful techniques that you've discovered?

`BENJAMIN:` You have to plan ahead farther. I feel like some of the helpful techniques like having a plan, moving backward, starting with your date and then moving backward, how soon do you have to start advertising or looking at this stuff. Quite honestly, having this Americorp Vista employee. Finding the right people. The best thing that I can do is find the right people that know how to do that stuff so that I don't. I've done that somewhat effectively. I can't tutor students in all these subjects. It's funny that I have a drop-in center and I'm not exactly like a tutor or an education major or someone with a Master's degree or any of that. It's finding the right people. I feel like my biggest asset is finding and equipping the people to put them in the right place and keeping them in the right place. I don't like to move and shift things around like other people do every six months or two years. Like "Oh, yeah, we're just going to change everything." I'm more of a slow and steady type of person. We're just going to go at this slow and steady and I'm going to put you in the right spot and you're going to to keep doing what you love to do as long as that's what you love to do still. That, I feel, is my biggest win. It's when I can find people to do some of the things in the areas that I'm weak.

`ERIK:` How do you go about the advertising?

`BENJAMIN:` We've done different things. We've done Fox 47's Morning Blend. I did that because it was cheap and they give you a social media link that you can throw up on your Facebook and tweet it out. I did that because it gives you three minutes being able to share your story or to promote a certain event or something like that. For like $1,200 for six segments it was a pretty good deal to get production quality with two hosts who are asking you questions. I've done Fox 47 Morning Blend, I did some things with M3 Group, which is a branding/marketing firm.

`ERIK:` Yeah, I've met Tiffany Dowling.

`BENJAMIN:` Okay, yeah. They've done some things for us, too, with press releases and stuff like that. But mainly it's the grassroots, passing out fliers, hanging out with students, going up to the schools, talking to students in their classrooms. Word of mouth, they always say, is the strongest form of advertising, but that also takes the most effort because you're going to festivals. We're part of the Holt Hometown Festival every year so we're passing out fliers and promoting things that way. That's been how we've done it. I would like to go more into figuring out how to do more with social media and Google. It's interesting because as I've figured out, we have three clients: we have students, we have their parents, and then we have the donors. Each one of those need a different kind of way that you market them, but we need all three. So it's hard to find out which one I hit at what point.

`ERIK:` I was thinking that by putting a strong effort for trying to get fundraising done through social media, that might be hitting more students than their parents. Although, in ten years that might be totally different because you have younger generations who were growing up with computers and social media who are still engaged with it.

`BENJAMIN:` Hitting donors, though, is different. That's why I was part of the Morning Blend. Just getting the name out there, I still don't think we raised any money, I've just put out money. I don't know if we brought in any money from doing the Morning Blend except that it gives me visibility and put our logo on TV screens and a link on YouTube that we shared and our newsletters and stuff that I wouldn't normally have. Maybe then the next time I go to a big company in Lansing and say this is what I'm doing: "Oh yeah, I've hear about that, I've seen that, I've seen your logo." That might be the only thing I've done so far to get the donors is to give them visibility. They know United Way, they know Ele's Place, there are a few that are really big nonprofits that you hear of and see all the time and so I'm just trying to saturate that a little bit and get my name into there so the next time I go to them, maybe they're familiar a little bit. It's different. It's interesting, it's a tough world.

`ERIK:` That's got to be really challenging.

`BENJAMIN:` That's our challenges. All of the businesses, everyone's always hit up for money. We all think our cause is the best.

`ERIK:` That was something Don had told me. I bumped into him at a mixer and I told him how I had evolved the idea of Giving Jar because he had helped with an early rendition at Startup Weekend in February. I caught him up and he had just started talking as like, it's always fundraising time, always trying to make contacts, and reach out to people, and let them know and try to get their interest and engage them to see if they're interested in donating.

`BENJAMIN:` It is.

`ERIK:` You can never let up. Let's see, what kind of pointers would you give someone wanting to learn more about nonprofits? Even so much as wanting to start one up?

`BENJAMIN:` Starting one up, you have to have a lot of research and know what your mission and your vision is and be able to clearly define that and spell it out because to get a 501(c)3 through the government is not an easy process. They like to collect taxes, the IRS wants to collect taxes, they don't just give that 501(c)3 away to anybody. Starting it up, you have to answer a lot of tough questions and go through a tough process and be willing, I think, to have that process take as long as it needs to. I think some people might rush jumping into something with a nonprofit, especially trying to get that tax exempt status and all of that. Eventually, you could mess yourself up in the long run or it can take a lot longer. Because I took a year and a half with a business advisor and he asked me a bunch of the questions I would have had no idea to ask, I was able to get my 501(c)3 in like a record. I've told accountants this and I've told other people this and other nonprofits this and they're like "I can't even believe that happened!" When I applied, I applied for my nonprofit and got it in less than two months. I'm sorry, I applied for my 501(c)3 through the IRS and I got it in less than two months without them asking any more questions. Normally, what the accountants and everyone else told me was to expect it to take 6-9 months because they're going to call you up and they're going to need more of this information and need more of that, you didn't specify this, blah blah blah. Expect it to be this and I got a letter that said "You are approved." I attributed that to the fact that I did a lot of research and had a lot of things planned out on the front-end with the business plan that I think a lot of time people in nonprofits don't have. They just have the cause, they know what they want to do, but not know how to get there. I look at that and I just attribute that to I had a lot of people asking me those questions so when I went to do my application for filing the 501(c)3 I was like "Oh my gosh." I was just cutting and pasting all this stuff I had already worked through. I had to write a lot of stuff out, but a lot of it was cut and paste. I remember this, I'm going to pull this from over here. Oh yeah, I did that research, I'm going to pull this from over there. A lot of people aren't willing to go through that type of painstakingly, here's my cause, but what would it look like?

`ERIK:` To me it sounds like the difference between someone who has an idea and wants to invent something versus someone who wants to make a business out of it.

`BENJAMIN:` Yeah, that is the difference between them.

`ERIK:` There's a lot more planning and knowledge that has to go behind the business part of it than just knowing what the end result or what you're going to make is.

`BENJAMIN:` Yeah, yeah, that's true. That's a good correlation. For nonprofits, I've dealt with churches for years of course, and that's a whole different animal with nonprofit. All the accountants I asked were like "Are you sure you don't want this to be a ministry of a church because it would be a lot easier." I was like, no, I don't want it to be a ministry of a church, I want it to be its own thing. The church world, there are so many easy, quick, loophole things. You don't have to jump through all of the hoops when it's a religion. But when it's a charitable organization there are a lot of hoops you have to jump through. And the other thing I would say is if you're not going to be willing, which I don't like having to fundraise, but if you're not willing to fundraise, you may want to consider going for-profit because you have to fundraise. You've got to figure out how to get money to your place. Do you want to be nonprofit or for-profit, because if you want to be nonprofit there are certain rules. That's what my business advisor asked me, too. Are you sure you want to be nonprofit or are you going to be for-profit in this because there are positives and negatives to both.

`ERIK:` I almost jumped the gun on the 501(c)3 on Giving Jar. I had taken the time to talk to a couple of people about it and they said you don't even need to make the decision right now. I'm glad people are open and willing to give advice about that sort of thing.

`BENJAMIN:` Yeah, you have two years, I guess, or... I don't know what it is. When you file for your nonprofit, what is that, like $50 and you get your EIN number or whatever and you've got yourself a business. And then if you want to file to be a 501(c)3 you've got two years or something to do that from the date of your inception to when you file to be a 501(c)3. You've got a long time to figure out if that's what you want to do.

`ERIK:` How do you think Giving Jar can help? It's getting pretty close to 12:30... especially from helping people discover charities and encouraging donations.

`BENJAMIN:` The best help would be being able to figure out how to get word out there and give us a better presence so that we could raise funds. I don't know if I entirely understand how what you would do would work, but if we're able to raise more money with a more minimal amount of effort then I'm for it. And by minimal I don't mean we don't have to work or put out newsletters and put out the word on social media, but that we're not organizing entire campaigns. If you have resources and have buttons and links that we could just put in things, that would be really easy for people to use. I think if we sent out things in newsletters or on social media, it has to be one or two clicks away. A here, check this out, click this link and you're just two steps away from donating to Building Twentyone every time you shop kind of thing. It has to be as easy as a 1-2-3 step thing if it's going to work. You know, people don't want to, there's a maximum of like three clicks before you've lost them.

`ERIK:` I would like to try to get Giving Jar to the point where once it's setup, there's no clicking involved. You are just shopping. I will probably have the same challenge initially, how do I get people to sign up for Giving Jar and go find a charity and then configure it all. But once you get it setup, you just go shop and then it might ask you the first time if you want to donate if you shop on this site, but once you make that one click and say "Yes" and you complete your shopping, it will automatically start doing the donations.

`BENJAMIN:` If there's a way to set that up simply, I think that's great. It's getting the word out and figure out how that actually operates.

`ERIK:` Well, that is it. A lot of the questions just got covered through chit-chatting.

`BENJAMIN:` Yeah, I have no problem with that!
